+++
date = "2014-08-04"
title = "1st International Summer Symposium on Systems Biology"
end = "2014-08-06"
place = "INMEGEN"
maps = "https://goo.gl/maps/1CUc2NA46Bu"
webpage = "http://www.inmegen.gob.mx/is3b/"
+++

Those are the proceedings for the 1st edition of the “International Summer Symposium on Systems
Biology: From networks to phenotypes in human diseases”. The meeting took place at the National
Institute of Genomic Medicine (INMEGEN) in Mexico City from August 4-6, 2014. This event was the
first of a series of meetings to encourage the development of the systems biology in Mexico and the
development of this area to tackle basic and applied research in medical and biomedical fields.
This effort was supported by the Laboratory of Human Systems Biology-INMEGEN and Fundación
Televisa to create a scientific ambiance for discussing some methods and strategies to develop the
bases of a systemic and personalized medicine in a national and international perspective.

The purposes of the meeting were:

- Discuss some of the frontier research in Systems Biology and its applications for understanding
human diseases.

- Create an ambiance to establish collaborations among groups that will promote different
computational frameworks for modeling human diseases.

- Design strategies to encourage growth in this area in biomedical, medicine and genomic sciences at
the undergraduate and graduate levels since these are areas with potential for dealing with health
problems in Mexico.

To reach these goals, the meeting brought together some national and international qualified experts
from different research groups, providing an excellent occasion for academic exchange between local
and foreign colleagues in a pleasant and collaborative environment. The program included plenary
lectures, poster sessions, a discussion panel and a series of short presentations geared towards
postdoctoral researchers and advanced graduate students.
