+++ 
authors = ["Ugo Avila-Ponce De León","Aarón Vázquez-Jiménez","Meztli Matadamas-Guzman","Rosana Pelayo","Osbaldo Resendis-Antonio"] 
title = "Transcriptional and Microenvironmental Landscape of Macrophage Transition in Cancer: A Boolean Analysis" 
journal= "Frontiers in Immunology" 
what = "article" 
doi="10.3389/fimmu.2021.642842" 
pubmed = "34177892" 
date = "2021-06-10" 
+++

The balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory immune system responses is crucial to face and counteract complex diseases such as cancer. Macrophages are an essential population that contributes to this balance in collusion with the local tumor microenvironment. Cancer cells evade the attack of macrophages by liberating cytokines and enhancing the transition to the M2 phenotype with pro-tumoral functions. Despite this pernicious effect on immune systems, the M1 phenotype still exists in the environment and can eliminate tumor cells by liberating cytokines that recruit and activate the cytotoxic actions of TH1 effector cells. Here, we used a Boolean modeling approach to understand how the tumor microenvironment shapes macrophage behavior to enhance pro-tumoral functions. Our network reconstruction integrates experimental data and public information that let us study the polarization from monocytes to M1, M2a, M2b, M2c, and M2d subphenotypes. To analyze the dynamics of our model, we modeled macrophage polarization in different conditions and perturbations. Notably, our study identified new hybrid cell populations, undescribed before. Based on the in vivo macrophage behavior, we explained the hybrid macrophages’ role in the tumor microenvironment. The in silico model allowed us to postulate transcriptional factors that maintain the balance between macrophages with anti- and pro-tumoral functions. In our pursuit to maintain the balance of macrophage phenotypes to eliminate malignant tumor cells, we emulated a theoretical genetically modified macrophage by modifying the activation of NFκB and a loss of function in HIF1-α and discussed their phenotype implications. Overall, our theoretical approach is as a guide to design new experiments for unraveling the principles of the dual host-protective or -harmful antagonistic roles of transitional macrophages in tumor immunoediting and cancer cell fate decisions.
