+++
authors = ["Ugo Avila-Ponce de León", "Osbaldo Resendis-Antonio"]
title = "Macrophage Boolean networks in the time of SARS-CoV-2"
journal = "Frontiers in Immunology"
what = "article"
doi = "10.3389/fimmu.2022.997434"
pubmed = ""
date = "2022-10-17"
+++

The post-pandemic period of the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has lasted longer than expected despite the huge impact of the world-wide vaccination campaign in the past years. Since the pandemic began, endless mathematical models have been published to describe the viral outbreak at a population level. However, the molecular mechanism that drives the pathogenesis of the virus in the human microenvironment has been scarce. The existing mechanistic models deal to answer how SARS-CoV-2 invades the lung microenvironment and shapes the composition of the immune system in favor of virus duplication. From the clinical point of view, almost all patients that develop severe COVID-19 lead from a life-threatening acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which is associated with a hyper-inflammatory microenvironment and injury in the alveolar and lung epithelium. One of the cells associated with this syndrome is an uncontrolled hyper-activated macrophage-associated syndrome (MAS), which promotes a systemic inflammatory response that exacerbates the progress of the cytokine storm in the host. Furthermore, single-cell high-throughput technologies applied in COVID-19 infections have shown that macrophages and monocytes are more abundant over other immune cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). In addition, the cytokines produced by monocytes and macrophages modulate the response of the immune system in patients with COVID-19. For instance, there is evidence supporting that monocytes in severe patients have a lower expression of the human leukocyte antigen HLA-DRB1, which represses the activation of the immune response through the low production of foreign peptides. Besides, monocytes have a lower expression of interferon-stimulated genes in severe COVID-19 patients, resulting in the delay of the interferon response against SARS-CoV-2. Furthermore, macrophages in severe COVID-19 patients are associated with overexpression of pro-inflammatory genes when compared with moderate COVID-19 patients. Altogether, these and other findings highlight the remarkable role that monocytes and macrophage polarization have in the progression of the disease.
