+++
authors = ["Alejandra V Contreras", "Benjamin Cocom-Chan", "Georgina Hernandez-Montes", "Tobias Portillo-Bobadilla", "Osbaldo Resendis-Antonio"]
title = "Host-Microbiome Interaction and Cancer: Potential Application in Precision Medicine."
journal = "Frontiers in physiology"
what = "article"
doi = "10.3389/fphys.2016.00606"
pubmed = "28018236"
date = "2016-12-27"
keywords = ["cancer metabolism", "metabolome", "microbiome", "next generation sequencing (NGS)", "precision medicine", "systems integration"]
+++

It has been experimentally shown that host-microbial interaction plays a major role in shaping the wellness or disease of the human body. Microorganisms coexisting in human tissues provide a variety of benefits that contribute to proper functional activity in the host through the modulation of fundamental processes such as signal transduction, immunity and metabolism. The unbalance of this microbial profile, or dysbiosis, has been correlated with the genesis and evolution of complex diseases such as cancer. Although this latter disease has been thoroughly studied using different high-throughput (HT) technologies, its heterogeneous nature makes its understanding and proper treatment in patients a remaining challenge in clinical settings. Notably, given the outstanding role of host-microbiome interactions, the ecological interactions with microorganisms have become a new significant aspect in the systems that can contribute to the diagnosis and potential treatment of solid cancers. As a part of expanding precision medicine in the area of cancer research, efforts aimed at effective treatments for various kinds of cancer based on the knowledge of genetics, biology of the disease and host-microbiome interactions might improve the prediction of disease risk and implement potential microbiota-directed therapeutics. In this review, we present the state of the art of sequencing and metabolome technologies, computational methods and schemes in systems biology that have addressed recent breakthroughs of uncovering relationships or associations between microorganisms and cancer. Together, microbiome studies extend the horizon of new personalized treatments against cancer from the perspective of precision medicine through a synergistic strategy integrating clinical knowledge, HT data, bioinformatics, and systems biology.