+++
authors = ["Ugo Avila-Ponce de León", "Aarón Vázquez-Jiménez", "Pablo Padilla-Longoria", "Osbaldo Resendis-Antonio"]
title = "Uncoding the interdependency of tumor microenvironment and macrophage polarization: insights from a continuous network approach"
journal = "Front Immunol"
what = "article"
doi = "10.3389/fimmu.2023.1150890"
pubmed = "https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37283734/"
date = "2023-05-22"
+++

The balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory immune system responses is crucial to preventing complex diseases like cancer. Macrophages are essential immune cells that contribute to this balance constrained by the local signaling profile of the tumor microenvironment. To understand how pro- and anti-inflammatory unbalance emerges in cancer, we developed a theoretical analysis of macrophage differentiation that is derived from activated monocytes circulating in the blood. Once recruited to the site of inflammation, monocytes can be polarized based on the specific interleukins and chemokines in the microenvironment. To quantify this process, we used a previous regulatory network reconstructed by our group and transformed Boolean Network attractors of macrophage polarization to an ODE scheme, it enables us to quantify the activation of their genes in a continuous fashion. The transformation was developed using the interaction rules with a fuzzy logic approach. By implementing this approach, we analyzed different aspects that cannot be visualized in the Boolean setting. For example, this approach allows us to explore the dynamic behavior at different concentrations of cytokines and transcription factors in the microenvironment. One important aspect to assess is the evaluation of the transitions between phenotypes, some of them characterized by an abrupt or a gradual transition depending on specific concentrations of exogenous cytokines in the tumor microenvironment. For instance, IL-10 can induce a hybrid state that transits between an M2c and an M2b macrophage. Interferon- γ can induce a hybrid between M1 and M1a macrophage. We further demonstrated the plasticity of macrophages based on a combination of cytokines and the existence of hybrid phenotypes or partial polarization. This mathematical model allows us to unravel the patterns of macrophage differentiation based on the competition of expression of transcriptional factors. Finally, we survey how macrophages may respond to a continuously changing immunological response in a tumor microenvironment. 